Create rule S6655: Variables should not be accessed outside of their scope (CPP-4466) (#2314)
SonarSource/rspec: rules/S6655/cfamily/rule.adoc

> Accessing local objects outside of the scope (for example via pointer
> taken in scope) has undefined behavior. This rule flags such access

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Accessing local objects outside of their scope (for example via pointer
taken inside the scope) has undefined behavior. This rule flags such access
```

> for local variables and lifetime extended temporaries.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
for local variables and lifetime-extended temporaries.
```

structures, like `if` or `for` that also introduce scope:

[source,cpp]
----
int exampleWithIf() {
  int* ptr;
  if (int i = 10)
    ptr = &i;
  else
    ptr = nullptr;
  // variable i declared in if condition statement goes out of scope here
  if (ptr)
    return *ptr; // Noncompliant: reading from out-of-scope variable
  return 0;
}
void exampleWithFor() {
  int* ptr = nullptr;
  for (int i = 0; i < 10; ++i)
    ptr = &i;
  // variable i defined in for init-statement goes out of scope here
  *ptr = 10; // Noncompliant
}
----

=== What is the potential impact?

Accessing a dangling reference or pointer causes undefined behavior.
This means the compiler is not bound by the language standard anymore
 and your program has no meaning assigned to it.

Practically this has a wide range of effects.
In many cases, the access works by accident and succeeds at writing or
reading a value. However, it can start misbehaving at anytime.
If compilation flags, compiler, platform, or runtime environment change,
the same code can crash the application, corrupt memory, or leak a secret.

=== Why is the issue raised for reference variables?

> When a reference variable is directly initialized to the temporary object,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When a reference variable is directly initialized to a temporary object,
```

such temporary is lifetime-extended by the variable, i.e. the temporary
object is destroyed when the variable goes out of scope.
Lifetime-extended temporaries have the same behavior, as if they would be
declared as local variables, and may lead to the same issues. For example:

[source,cpp]
----
Clazz create();
void refExtension(Clazz const arg) {
  Clazz const* aPtr;
  Clazz const* tPtr;
  {
    Clazz const& tRef = create(); // temporary object is created here and bound to reference,

>                                   // behaves as Class const tRef = create();

Reviewer: ```suggestion
                                  // behaves as Clazz const tRef = create();
```

    Clazz const& aRef = arg; // bounding reference to object arg
    tPtr = &tRef;  // point to a temporary object that is lifetime extended
    aPtr = &aRef;  // points to arg
  } // both tRef and aRef go out of scope here, because tRef was extending the lifetime of
    // temporary variable, the object is destroyed
  aPtr->foo(); // OK, a points to arg
  tPtr->foo(); // Noncompliant: the pointers point to a dangling temporary

> }

Reviewer: I suggest swapping the declarations of `aRef` and `tRef` and assignments of `aPtr` and `tPtr`, to keep them always in the same order:
1. a-something
2. t-something

for all for sections - declration of ptrs, declaration of refs, assignment of ptrs, access of ptrs

Reviewer 2: Good suggestion. Applied.

----

== How to fix it

> Commonly, the use of out-of-scope local object is an indication of a defect in code,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Commonly, the use of an out-of-scope local object is an indication of a defect in code,
```

[source,cpp]
----
#include <span>
#include <optional>
#include <algorithm>
std::optional<int> minimum(std::span<int const> s) {
  auto it = std::min_element(s.begin(), s.end());
  if (it == s.end())
    return std::nullopt;
  return *it;
}
----

=== Pitfalls

Reducing the number of nested scopes is not always the right solution to fix
the issue, because, for the variables that represent resources (uses RAII idiom),
the scope of the variables plays an important role in the correctness of the program.
As an illustration, let's consider the following example, that uses `std::unique_lock`
that represents a lock of the mutex:

[source,cpp]
----
std::mutex dataMutex;
Data data;
void process() {
  Element e;
  { // scope A
     std::unique_lock<std::mutex> l1(dataMutex); // mutex is locked in constructor
     e = data.fetch();
  } // l1 destructor is called here, and the lock is unlocked
  // do processing of the element
  if (e.finished())
    return;
  { // scope B
    std::unique_lock<std::mutex> l2(dataMutex); // mutex is locked in constructor
    data.append(std::move(e));
  } // l2 destructor is called here, and the mutex is unlocked
}
----

> In the above example, scope `A` and `B` limits the operation that is performed in

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the above example, scopes `A` and `B` limit the operation that is performed in
```

where the local object was used by mistake, and in such case, replacing it with the
desired variable or removing the use is sufficient.
For other scenarios, two general approaches are possible:

* Extending the scope of the referenced variable
* Capturing a copy of the object instead of a pointer to it

Whenever possible, it is preferable to use or create a dedicated algorithm that
encapsulates the uses of pointers to local objects.

=== Code examples

==== Noncompliant code example

[source,cpp,diff-id=1,diff-type=noncompliant]
----
#include <span>
#include <optional>
std::optional<int> minimum(std::span<int const> s) {
  if (s.empty()) {
    return std::nullopt;
  }
  int* min = nullptr;
  for (int i = 0; i < s.size(); ++i) {
    if ((min == nullptr) || (*min < s[i]))
      min = &i;  // should be address of &s[i]
  }
  return *min; // Noncompliant: dangling
}
----

==== Compliant solution

Fixing the typo, and taking the address of `&s[i]`:

[source,cpp,diff-id=1,diff-type=compliant]
----
#include <span>
#include <optional>
std::optional<int> minimum(std::span<int const> s) {
  if (s.empty()) {
    return std::nullopt;
  }

>   int* min = nullptr;

Reviewer 3: Does not compile without const:
```diff
- int* min = nullptr;
+ int const* min = nullptr;
```

  for (int i = 0; i < s.size(); ++i) {
    if ((min == nullptr) || (*min < s[i]))
      min = &s[i];
  }
  return *min; // Compliant, points to an element of s
}
----

Storing a copy instead of a pointer:

[source,cpp]
----
#include <span>
#include <optional>
std::optional<int> minimum(span<int const> s) {
   std::optional<int> min;
   for (int i = 0; i < s.size(); ++i) {
      if (min.has_value() || (*min < s[i]))
        min = s[i];
   }
   return min; // Compliant, copy of the minimum element
}
----

Using a dedicated algorithm that avoids the need to store the pointer:

[source,cpp]
----
#include <span>
#include <optional>
#include <algorithm>
std::optional<int> minimum(std::span<int const> s) {
  auto it = std::min_element(s.begin(), s.end());
  if (it == s.end())
    return std::nullopt;
  return *it;
}
----

=== Pitfalls

Reducing the number of nested scopes is not always the right solution to fix

> the issue because, for the variables that represent resources (uses RAII idiom),

Reviewer: ```suggestion
the issue because, for the variables that represent resources (using RAII idiom),
```

Accessing local objects outside of the scope (for example via pointer
taken in scope) has undefined behavior. This rule flags such access
for local variables and lifetime extended temporaries.

== Why is this an issue?

Local variables in C++ are attached to the scope and destroyed when
the end of the scope is reached. Any access to a variable outside
of their scope has undefined behavior. 

Such access occurs, for example when the address of a variable is
stored in the pointer, that is later defereferenced:

[source,cpp]
----
int func() {
  int* ptr = nullptr;
  {
    int i = 10;
    ptr = &i;
  } // variable i goes out of scope here

>   *ptr = 10; // non-complaint, writing to out-of-scope-variable

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  *ptr = 10; // Noncompliant: writing to out-of-scope-variable
```

}
----

A similar defect can occur in code that does not have curly braces
(also referred to as a compound statement), but contain control
structures, like `if` or `for` that also introduce scope:

[source,cpp]
----
int exampleWithIf() {
  int* ptr;
  if (int i = 10)
    ptr = &i;
  else 
    ptr = nullptr;
  // variable i declared in if condition statement goes out of scope here
  if (ptr)

>     return *ptr; // non-complaint, reading from out-of-scope variable

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    return *ptr; // Noncompliant: reading from out-of-scope variable
```

  return 0;
}

void exampleWithFor() {
  int* ptr = nullptr;
  for (int i = 0; i < 10; ++i)
    ptr = &i;
  // variable i defined in for init-statement goes out of scope here

>   *ptr = 10; //dangling

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  *ptr = 10; // Noncompliant
```

the same code can crash the application, corrupt memory, or leak a secret.

=== Why is the issue raised for reference variables?

When a reference variable is directly initialized to the temporary object, 
such temporary is lifetime-extended by the variable, i.e. the temporary
object is destroyed when the variable goes out of scope. 
Lifetime-extended temporaries have the same behavior, as if they would be
declared as local variables, and may lead to the same issues. For example:

[source,cpp]
----
Clazz create();
void refExtension(Clazz const arg) {
  Clazz const* aPtr;
  Clazz const* tPtr;
  {
    Clazz const& tRef = create(); // temporary object is created here and bound to reference,
                                  // behaves as Class const tRef = create();
    Clazz const& aRef = arg; // bounding reference to object arg
    tPtr = &tRef;  // point to temporary object that is lifetime extended
    aPtr = &aRef;  // points to arg
  } // both tRef and aRef goes out of scope here, because tRef was extending the lifetime of 
    // temporary variable, the object is destroyed
  aPtr->foo(); // OK, a points to arg

>   tPtr->foo(); // non-complaint, the pointers point to a dangling temporary

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  tPtr->foo(); // Noncompliant: the pointers point to a dangling temporary
```

}
----

== How to fix it

Commonly, the use of out-of-scope local object is an indication of a defect in code,
where the local object was used by mistake, and in such case replacing it with the
desired variable or removing the use is sufficient. 
For other scenarios two general approaches are possible:

* Extending the scope of the referenced variable
* Capturing a copy of the object, instead of a pointer to it

Whenever possible, it is preferable to use or create a dedicated algorithm that encapsulates the uses of pointers to local objects.

=== Code examples

==== Noncompliant code example

[source,cpp,diff-id=1,diff-type=noncompliant]
----
#include <span>
#include <optional>

std::optional<int> minimum(std::span<int const> s) {
  if (s.empty()) {
    return std::nullopt;
  }

  int* min = nullptr;
  for (int i = 0; i < s.size(); ++i) {
    if ((min == nullptr) || (*min < s[i]))
      min = &i;  // should be address of &s[i]
  }

>   return *min; // non-complaint, dangling

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  return *min; // Noncompliant: dangling
```

}
----

==== Compliant solution

Fixing the typo, and taking the address of `&s[i]`:

[source,cpp,diff-id=1,diff-type=compliant]
----
#include <vector>
#include <optional>

std::optional<int> minimum(std::span<int const> s) {
  if (s.empty()) {
    return std::nullopt;
  }

  int* min = nullptr;
  for (int i = 0; i < s.size(); ++i) {
    if ((min == nullptr) || (*min < s[i]))
      min = &s[i];
  }

>   return *min; // complaint, points to an element of s

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  return *min; // Compliant, points to an element of s
```

}
----

Storing a copy instead of a pointer:

[source,cpp]
----
#include <vector>
#include <optional>

std::optional<int> minimum(span<int const> s) {
   std::optional<int> min;
   for (int i = 0; i < s.size(); ++i) {
      if (min.has_value() || (*min < s[i]))
        min = s[i]; 
   }

>    return min; // complaint, copy of minimum element

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   return min; // Compliant, copy of minimum element
```

}
----

Using a dedicated algorithm that avoids the need to store the pointer:

[source,cpp]
----
#include <span>
#include <optional>
#include <algorithm>

std::optional<int> minimum(std::span<int const> s) {
  auto it = std::min_element(s.begin(), s.end());
  if (it == s.end())
    return std::nullopt;
  return *it;
}
----

=== Pitfalls

Reducing the number of nested scopes is not always the right solution to fix
the issue, because, for the variables that represent resources (uses RAII idiom),
the scope of the variables plays an important role in the correctness of the program.
As an illustration, let's consider the following example, that uses `std::unique_lock`
that represents a lock of the mutex:

[source,cpp]
----
std::mutex dataMutex;

> Data d;

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Data data;
```

void process() {
  Element e;
  { // scope A
     std::unique_lock<std::mutex> l1(dataMutex); // mutex is locked in constructor
     e = data.fetch();
  } // l1 destructor is called here, and the lock is unlocked

  // do processing of the element
  if (e.finished())
    return;

  { // scope B
    std::unique_lock<std::mutex> l2(dataMutex); // mutex is locedk in constructor
    data.append(std::move(e));

>   } // l2 destructor is called free, and the mutex is unlocked

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  } // l2 destructor is called here, and the mutex is unlocked
```

Accessing local objects outside of their scope (for example, via a pointer
taken inside the scope) has undefined behavior. This rule flags such
access for local variables and lifetime-extended temporaries.

== Why is this an issue?

Local variables in C++ are attached to the scope and destroyed when
the end of the scope is reached. Any access to a variable outside
of their scope has undefined behavior.

Such access occurs, for example, when the address of a variable is

> stored in the pointer, which is later dereferenced:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
stored in a pointer that is later dereferenced:
```

=== Pitfalls

Reducing the number of nested scopes is not always the right solution to fix
the issue because, for the variables that represent resources (uses RAII idiom),
the scope of the variables plays an important role in the correctness of the program.
As an illustration, let's consider the following example that uses `std::unique_lock`

> that represents a lock of the mutex:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
that represents a lock of a mutex:
```

=== Related rules

> * S5553 detects uses of reclaimed temporary variables, that aren't lifetime-extended.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* S5553 detects uses of reclaimed temporary variables that are not lifetime-extended.
```
